The Act Explore the Act The AI Act Explorer The Act Texts High-level summary of the AI Act Context Institutional Context Historic Documents Historic Timeline Analyses Assessment Implementation Overview Implementation Documents Implementation Timeline Standard Setting Whistleblowing Member States Tasks for Member States National Implementation Plans AI Regulatory Sandboxes The AI Office Overview: The AI Office Tasks for The AI Office Enforcement of Chapter V: GPAI Obligations The Advisory Forum: What Is It And How Does It Work? Why work at The AI Office? The Scientific Panel: What Is It And How Does It Work? General-Purpose AI Overview: Providers of GPAI Models Guidelines for GPAI Models Introduction to the Code of Practice Code of Practice Summarised Compliance Tools Compliance Checker Guides for Businesses Small Businesses’ Guide AI Therapy under the EU AI Act Guide for HR & Staffing Businesses Guide to Article 50 Transparency rules AI Literacy Programs Modifying AI Models & Systems About us Newsletter EN FR DE ES Select Page 🔔 Alert: Huge hiring round at the EU AI Office; 40 new posts (tech, legal, ops, and more) dedicated to enforcing the AI Act | Express interest by 8 Sept, Midday CET Implementation Timeline This page lists all of the key dates you need to be aware of relating to the implementation of the EU AI Act. Related resources  Tasks and Responbilities For a summary of all tasks and responsibilities assigned to the AI Office or Member States by the EU AI Act, see our blog posts and infographics on the topic.  Historic Timeline For a timeline of all key events in the AI Act’s history so far, see our Historic Timeline of the AI Act.  EU AI Act Newsletter If you want to be notified about significant updates to the Act and its implementation, subscribe to the EU AI Act Newsletter, a biweekly newsletter by the Future of Life Institute. Timeline of key dates Last updated: 31 August 2026 Items in blue relate to the Application of the Act. Download timeline as image 2024 Date 12 July 2024 The AI Act is published in the Official Journal of the European Union. This serves as the formal notification of the new law. Related AI Act Content Article 113 Date 1 August 2024 Application: Date of entry into force of the AI Act. At this stage, none of the Act’s requirements apply—they will begin to apply gradually over time. Related AI Act Content Article 113 Date 2 November 2024 Member States: Deadline for Member States to identify and publicly list the authorities / bodies responsible for fundamental rights protection, and to notify the Commission and other Member States. Related AI Act Content Article 77(2) 2025 Date 2 February 2025 Application: Prohibitions on certain AI systems and requirements on AI literacy start to apply (Chapter 1 and Chapter 2 , with the exception of Article 5(1), first subparagraph, points (ba) and (bb), and Article 5(1a) and (1b), namely the prohibition on AI systems that generate non-consensual intimate imagery and child sexual abuse material (CSAM). Related AI Act Content Article 113(a)Recital 179 Date 2 May 2025 Commission: Codes of practice on general-purpose AI models shall be ready by this date. Related AI Act Content Article 56(9)Recital 179 Date 2 August 2025 Application: The following rules start to apply: Notified bodies (Chapter III, Section 4), GPAI models (Chapter V), Governance (Chapter VII), Confidentiality (Article 78) Certain penalty provisions (Articles 99 and 100) Related AI Act Content Article 113(b) Date 2 August 2025 Providers: Providers of GPAI models that have been placed on the market before this date need to be compliant with the AI Act by 2 August 2027. Related AI Act Content Article 111(3) Date 2 August 2025 (and every two years thereafter) Member States: Deadline for Member States to report to the Commission on the status of the financial and human resources of the national competent authorities. Related AI Act Content Article 70(6) Date 2 August 2025 Member States: Deadline for Member States to designate national competent authorities (notifying authorities and market surveillance authorities), communicate them to the Commission, and make their contact details publicly available. Related AI Act Content Article 70(2) Date 2 August 2025 (based on date of application of Articles on ‘Penalties’) Member States: Deadline for Member States to lay down rules for penalties and fines, notify them to the Commission, and ensure that they are properly implemented. Related AI Act Content Recital 179 Date 2 August 2025 Commission: (If code of practice cannot be finalised, or if the AI Office deems it is not adequate) Commission may provide common rules for the implementation of the obligations for providers of GPAI models via implementing acts. Related AI Act Content Article 56(9) Date 2 August 2025 (and every year thereafter) Commission: Deadline for annual Commission review and possible amendments on prohibitions. Related AI Act Content Article 112(1) Date 2 August 2025 Commission: Deadline for developing dedicated guidance to facilitate compliance with the obligation to report serious incidents to market surveillance authorities imposed on providers of high-risk AI systems. Related AI Act Content Article 73(7) 2026 Date 2 February 2026 Commission: Deadline for Commission to provide guidelines specifying the practical implementation of Article 6. Related AI Act Content Article 6(5). Date 27 July 2026 Application: Articles 102 to 110, amending other pieces of EU legislation, start applying. Related AI Act Content Article 113(d). Date 2 August 2026 Application: The remainder of the AI Act starts to apply, unless specified otherwise. Related AI Act Content Article 113 You are here 2027 Date 2 August 2027 Application: Article 6(1) and the corresponding obligations in the Regulation start to apply. Related AI Act Content Article 113 Date 2 August 2027 Providers: Providers of GPAI models placed on the market before 2 August 2025 must have taken the necessary steps to comply with the obligations laid down in this Regulation by this date. Related AI Act Content Article 111(3) Date 2 August 2027 Large-scale IT Systems: AI systems which are components of the large-scale IT systems listed in Annex X and that were placed on the market / put into service before this date shall be brought into compliance with this Regulation by 31 December 2030. Related AI Act Content Article 111(1) 2028 Date 2 August 2028 Commission: Commission shall evaluate the functioning of the AI Office. Related AI Act Content Article 112(5) Date 2 August 2028 (and every three years thereafter) Commission: Commission shall evaluate the impact and effectiveness of voluntary codes of conduct. Related AI Act Content Article 112(7)Recital 174 Date 2 August 2028 (and every four years thereafter) Commission: Commission shall evaluate and report to the European Parliament and to the Council on the need for amendments to: Area headings in Annex III, List of AI systems requiring additional transparency measures in Article 50, The supervision and governance system. Related AI Act Content Article 112(2)Recital 174 Date 2 August 2028 (and every four years thereafter) Commission: Commission shall submit a progress report on ‘standardisation deliverables’ which cover the topic of energy-efficient development of general-purpose AI models. This report must be submitted to the European Parliament and Council, and made public. Related AI Act Content Article 112(6)Recital 174 Date 1 December 2028 (which is 9 months prior to 1 August 2029) Commission: Commission must draw up a report on the delegation of power outlined in Article 97. Related AI Act Content Article 97(2) 2029 Date 1 August 2029 Commission: The Commission’s power to adopt delegated acts referred to in the following articles expires—unless this period is extended: Article 6 (6) and (7), Article 7 (1) and (3), Article 11 (3), Article 43 (5) and (6), Article 47 (5), Article 51 (3), Article 52 (4), Article 53 (5) and (6) The delegation of power will, by default, be extended for recurring 5-year periods unless the European Parliament or the Council opposes such extension three months or more before the end of each period. Related AI Act Content Article 97(2) Date 2 August 2029 (and every four years thereafter) Commission: Commission shall submit a report on the evaluation and review of this Regulation to the European Parliament and to the Council. Related AI Act Content Article 112(3)Recital 174 2030 Date 2 August 2030 Providers & Deployers: Providers and deployers of high-risk AI systems intended to be used by public authorities must have taken the necessary steps to comply with the requirements and obligations of this Regulation by this date. Related AI Act Content Article 111(2) Date 31 December 2030 Large-scale IT Systems: Deadline for AI systems which are components of the large-scale IT systems listed in Annex X and that were placed on the market or put into service before 2 August 2027 to be brought into compliance with this Regulation. Related AI Act Content Article 111(1) 2031 Date 2 August 2031 Commission: Commission shall carry out an assessment of the enforcement of this Regulation and shall report on it to the European Parliament, the Council and the European Economic and Social Committee. Related AI Act Content Article 112(13) This timeline will be updated with any new key dates announced by official European Union bodies. Please submit feedback and corrections to Taylor Jones at taylor@futureoflife.org Receive EU AI Act updates in your inbox every two weeks Subscribe to receive biweekly up-to-date developments and analyses of the proposed EU AI Act. With over 40,000 subscribers, this newsletter is the go-to resource for EU policymakers on the AI Act. See the Newsletter © Future of Life Institute, 2026 This website is maintained by the Future of Life Institute (FLI). Our EU transparency register number is 787064543128-10. Manage Consent To provide the best experiences, we use technologies like cookies to store and/or access device information. Consenting to these technologies will allow us to process data such as browsing behavior or unique IDs on this site. Not consenting or withdrawing consent, may adversely affect certain features and functions. Functional Functional Always active The technical storage or access is strictly necessary for the legitimate purpose of enabling the use of a specific service explicitly requested by the subscriber or user, or for the sole purpose of carrying out the transmission of a communication over an electronic communications network. Preferences Preferences The technical storage or access is necessary for the legitimate purpose of storing preferences that are not requested by the subscriber or user. Statistics Statistics The technical storage or access that is used exclusively for statistical purposes. The technical storage or access that is used exclusively for anonymous statistical purposes. Without a subpoena, voluntary compliance on the part of your Internet Service Provider, or additional records from a third party, information stored or retrieved for this purpose alone cannot usually be used to identify you. Marketing Marketing The technical storage or access is required to create user profiles to send advertising, or to track the user on a website or across several websites for similar marketing purposes. Manage options Manage services Manage {vendor_count} vendors Read more about these purposes Accept Deny View preferences Save preferences View preferences {title} {title} {title} Manage Consent To provide the best experiences, we use technologies like cookies to store and/or access device information. Consenting to these technologies will allow us to process data such as browsing behavior or unique IDs on this site. Not consenting or withdrawing consent, may adversely affect certain features and functions. Functional Functional Always active The technical storage or access is strictly necessary for the legitimate purpose of enabling the use of a specific service explicitly requested by the subscriber or user, or for the sole purpose of carrying out the transmission of a communication over an electronic communications network. Preferences Preferences The technical storage or access is necessary for the legitimate purpose of storing preferences that are not requested by the subscriber or user. Statistics Statistics The technical storage or access that is used exclusively for statistical purposes. The technical storage or access that is used exclusively for anonymous statistical purposes. Without a subpoena, voluntary compliance on the part of your Internet Service Provider, or additional records from a third party, information stored or retrieved for this purpose alone cannot usually be used to identify you. Marketing Marketing The technical storage or access is required to create user profiles to send advertising, or to track the user on a website or across several websites for similar marketing purposes. Manage options Manage services Manage {vendor_count} vendors Read more about these purposes Accept Deny View preferences Save preferences View preferences {title} {title} {title} Manage consent Manage consent